# Ad-Hoc Routing Overview
Ad-Hoc Routing or called Mobile Routing.
## Two Orthogonal Axis
- When is the route found?

    | Proactive Protocals | Reactive Protocols |
    | --- | --- |
    | Continuously evaluate routes | On demand, route discovery by some global search |
    | No latency for data messages | Bottleneck for first data messages due to latency of route discovery|
    | Large capacity to keep network information current | Control messages only used when needed.

- Who determines route?
    - Destination (*hop-by-hop*) routing
        + Source specifies only destination in message header.
        + Intermediate nodes look at destination in header, consult internal tables
        to determin appropriate next hop.
        + Like Postal service.
    - Source (*path*) routing
        + Source specifies entire route: places complete path to destination in
        message header.

    | Destination Routing | Source Routing |
    | --- | --- |
    | No source storage | Moderate source storage (entire route for each desired dest.) |
    | Need intermediate node storage (table with routing instructions for destinations.) | No intermediate node storage |
    | Lower data message overhead | Higher data message overhead |

## Mobile Ad-Hoc Network (MANET)

- Collection of mobile nodes forming a network.
- No centralized administration or standard support services.
- Highly co-operative, each host is an independent router.
- Hosts use wireless transceivers as network interface.
- *Network topology is dynamic* (frequent network changes).
- *Possible unidirectional links.*
- *Low bandwidth.*

# Dynamic Source Routing (DSR)

Basic idea:

- __On demand:__ No periodic router advertisements.
- __Source routing:__ to send a packet to another host, the sender constructs a
  source route in the packet’s header
- If no route found in the cache, the sender may attempt to discover one using
  the ___route discovery protocol___ (*basically it does a flood*).
- __Caching:__ each mobile host participating in the ad-hoc network
  maintains a route cache in which it caches source routes
  (*avoid further router discoveries*)
- Host monitors the correct operation of a route in use, we call this ___route
  maintenance___.

## Route Discovery
Assume __S__ broadcasts a route-request to __D__,
route request contains: route record (path followed), and request id (sequence
number). Each node forwards request by adding its own address to the route
record and re-broadcasting.

Requests propagate outward until:

- Target is found, or
- A node that has a route to D is found 
([Early Route Reply](#early-route-replies)).

__To forward or not to forward, that is the question! (RREQ)__

A request is forwarded if ___ALL___ below hold:

- Receiving node is not the destination
- Receiving node has not seen request with same sequence number from this
  source. (_Forward each request only once to avoid broadcase storms, for
  efficiency._)
- Receiving node is not already listed in the route record. _It helps to
  prevnet sending the message again in case you forgot you have seen it
  before._
- IP TTL field may be used to limit scope.

### Route Cache
All routes learned by a node are kept in Route Cache.

- Cache the route record of each route-request.
- Cache the path in each route-reply.
- Cache the path in each data packet.

Entries have limited lifetime. 

### Early Route-Replies
If intermediate node receives _RReq_ for _D_ and has entry for _D_ in route
cache, it responds to _RReq_ and does not propagate _RReq_ further.

### Unidirectional Links
With unidirectional links, path from _S_ to _D_ is not the same as from _D_
to _S_. Destination may need to discover a route to the source to deliver
__RRep__.

- If a route exists in its cache, use it.
- Otherwise, piggyback Route Reply onto new Route Request.
    - This is flooded towards source.
    - _This should not be terminated by an early route reply_, since the
      request contains a reply in it.

## Route Maintenance
to-do

Note: AODV is like DSR, but will not covered.

# Optimized Link-State Routing (OLSR)

First thing first, a quick review of Link-State Routing

- Each node periodically floods status of its neighboring links.
- Each node re-broadcasts link state information received from its neighbour.
- Each node keeps track of link state information received from other nodes.
- Each node uses above information to determine next hop to each destination.

OLSR inherits stability of like-state protocol. But is use selective flooding
(_only MPR retransmit control messages,_ minimizing flooding), which makes it
suitable for large and dense networks

## Multipoing Relays (MPRs)

MPRs = Set of selected neighbor nodes.

- Each node selects its MPRs among its one hop neighbors.
- __The set must cover all the nodes that are two hops away.__
- Used to minimize the flooding of broadcast packets.
- Link between node and it's MPR is bidirectional.

The information required to calculate the MPRs:

- The set of one-hop neighbors and the two-hop neighbors.
- There are many ways you can select MPRs from your neighbors.

_MPR Selector (MS) is a neighboring node which has selected me as an MPR._

The key point is: __not all nodes forward the flood, nonetheless the flood
reaches _all nodes_.__

### How-to
To obtain the information about one-hop neighbors:
> __Use `HELLO` message (received by all one-hop neighbors).__

To obtain the information about two-hop neighbors:
> __Each node attaches the list of its own neighbors.__

Once a node has its one and two-hop neighbor sets: 
> _It can select a MPRs which covers all its two-hop neighbors._

### Neighbor Sensing

Each node periodically broadcasts its HELLO messages:

- Containing the information about _its neighbors_.
- Hello messages are received by all one-hop neighbors.

Hello Message contains:

1. List of bidirectional neighbors,
2. list of one directional neighbors
3. MPR set.

### Neighbor Table
Each node records the information about its one hop neighbors and a list of two
hop neighbors.

Entry in the neighbor table has a holding time. Upon expiry of holding time, it
is removed.

Contains a sequence number value which specifies the most recent MPR set

- Every time a node updates its MPR set, this sequence number is incremented

- This is because you tell your neighbors about your own MPR set (distinguish
old from new)

## The Link-State Routing Part

Every node periodically broadcasts (i.e. a flood in the whole network) its MPR
Selector Set (MS), i.e., tell the whole network who has chosen you as an MPR.
The node DON’T mention its whole list of neighbors.

### Building the Topology
TC – Topology control message:

- Nodes with a non-empty MS periodically flood their MS via a TC message.
- Message might not be sent if there are no updates.
- Message contains: a) MPR Selector set (MS); b) Sequence number.

Each node maintains a __Topology Table__ based on TC messages. And routing
tables are calculated based on __Topology table__.


Upon receipt of TC message from Y:

- If there exist some entry to the same destination X with __higher__ Sequence
  Number, the TC message is ignored.
- If there exist some entry to the same destination X with __lower__ Sequence
  Number, the topology entry is removed and the new one is recorded
- If the entry (i.e. X, Y) is the _same_ as in TC message, the holding time of
  this entry is refreshed.
- If X is no longer in MS of Y, remove entry (X, Y).
- If there are __no__ corresponding entry – the new entry (X, Y) is recorded.

### Protocol functioning – Routing table calculation

Each node maintains a __routing table__ (in addition to the TC table) to all
known destinations in the network.
After each node TC message is received, you store connected pairs of form
(node, last-hop) in the topology table. Routing table is based on the
information contained in the ___neighbor table and the topology table___.

Consider the destination sent out a flood that reached every node. The message
reached the source, of course. The message would be forwarded by the
destination's MPRs, and the MPR of the MPRs. Eventually, along the path the
message was transfers from destination to source. Each node is the MPR of the
previous node.

> __ALL INTERMEDIATE NODES ARE MPR’s OF SOME NODE (y is mpr of x),__ MPR’s
> form a ___backbone___ network so to speaks.

### Table
| Neighbor Table | Topology Table | Routing Table |
| --- | :---: | --- |
| 1-hop neighbor | Dest Hop/Prev Hop | For every destination, who is my next hop? |
| 2-hop neighbor | X / Y ||
| MPR set | A / Y ||

## Sequence Number Used in the Protocols

- Seq # for MPR set
- Seq # for MPR selector set (MS)
- Seq # for the flooda (typical seq # for link-state)
